# Lecture 3

---

### **3.0 What is wrong with this data?**
Your objective is to create a file with how this data is supposed to look once it is clean. It is ok if you don't know the name of the steps. For now, just think of how the clean dataset will look like.

| name         | job     | age      | salary 2020 | salary 2021 |
|--------------|---------|----------|-------------|-------------|
| john         |         | 21 years | 0           | 1000        |
| JANE JOHNSON | analyst | 24       | $3500       | $4000       |
| Charlie      | chef    | fourty   | 30000       | 32000       |
  
---

### **3.1 Cleaning a real-world data**

You are going to be exploring and cleaning a real-world dataset here. All of the data comes from a real survey with thousands of participants.

1. Check the [survey](https://www.askamanager.org/2021/04/how-much-money-do-you-make-4.html) and spot questions that might lead to data quality issues.

2. Check the [answers](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1IPS5dBSGtwYVbjsfbaMCYIWnOuRmJcbequohNxCyGVw/edit?resourcekey#gid=1625408792). Were you assumptions about the last question correct?

3. Think what type of cleaning is needed to answer the following question: What is the average salary per race?

4. Think of which rows you should filter. What to do with empty rows, with people outside of the US, people with no salary, duplicates or partial duplicates, and salaries that seem either too high or too low. This is not a science, it is a matter of judgement.

5. Try to standarize the salary. Think of what to do with the column containing `Other monetary comp` and how you can turn other currencies into dollars (or whatever other currency you prefer).

6. Look at the `Country` column. How are you going to standarize it? Here is a rule of thumb, if you are cleaning:

- < 10 values: Use [logical formulas](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/functions_functions_logical.htm)  like `IF` and `CASE` or [use Groups in Tableau](https://www.guru99.com/tableau-sort-data.html). It is a manual option, but it is much better for performance.

- 10+ values: Create a new table (or spreadsheet) with 2 columns. One containing all of the unique values currently in the dataset and a second column with the clean value (your table should look like the one below). Once you are done, join both tables and only keep the correct one.

| Raw           | Clean         |
|---------------|---------------|
| US            | United States |
| USA           | United States |
| U.S.A.        | United States |
| United States | United States |
| America       | United States |
  
---

### **3.2 The Next Birthday?**

Your company wants a dashboard that shows how many days until the next birthdays or anniversaries. The data looks something like this:

```
employee_id, birthday, anniversary
1, 10 April, 15 October
2, 1 January, 1 December
3, 7 September, 1 November
4, 22 July, 1 July
```

1. Copy and paste this dataset into Tableau. [Here is a tutorial on how to do it](https://www.thedataschool.co.uk/jonathan-allenby/tableau-tip-you-can-paste-data-directly-into-tableau). Make sure the data is imported correctly (commas as separators).

2. Find a way to clean the dates. You were provided a day and a month, but the year is missing. If you just [change the data type to date](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/datafields_typesandroles_datatypes.htm), Tableau will infer the year 1900.

3. You don't need to do this, but there are some advantages in [pivoting](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/pivot.htm) both of the date columns (i.e. anniversary and birthday). Why don't you try creating a dataset that looks like this:

| employee_id | event_type  | date       |
|-------------|-------------|------------|
| 1           | birthday    | 10 April   |
| 1           | anniversary | 15 October |
| 2           | birthday    | 1 January  |
| 2           | anniversary | 1 December |

4. Try to calculate when will be the next birthday or anniversary. A big part of the job of an analyst is to Google these types of things, so I would advise you to do that instead of peaking at the hints. 

<details>
    <summary>Here is a hint.</summary>
    
  If the date hasn't happened yet this year, then the right year is YEAR(TODAY()). If the date happened already, the right year is YEAR(TODAY()) + 1. 

  The result that you requires the following ingredients: `MAKEDATE()`, `YEAR()`, `TODAY()`, `IIF()`.

  In case you are wondering, `IIF()` is short for Intermediate IF. While in a normal `IF` statement you can add as many conditions as you want, `IIF()` only accepts one clause. In plain English, if something then this, otherwise that. 
</details>

<details>
    <summary>Fine, here is the answer.</summary>

  You need two formulas, one that calculates the date this year. It will look something like this:

  ```
  MAKEDATE( 
    YEAR(TODAY()), 
    MONTH([Date]),
    DAY([Date])
  )
  ```

  The second formula is the date next year. 

  ```
  MAKEDATE( 
    YEAR(TODAY()) + 1, 
    MONTH([Date]),
    DAY([Date])
  )
  ```

  The final formula compares if the date has already happened. 

  For this one, I assume you called the first formulas `Date This Year` and then second formula `Date Next Year`. This won't work if you gave the formulas a different name.

  ```
  IIF(
    [Date This Year] > TODAY(),
    [Date This Year],
    [Date Next Year]
  )
  ```
</details>

5. Now use `TODAY()` and the formula you calculated in step 4 and find out how many days left before the next important dates.

<details>
    <summary> Fine, here is the answer. </summary>

```
 DATEDIFF(
    'day',
    [Date Next Year],
    TODAY()
 )
```
</details>
  

6. Filter to include only the top 5 events. [Check TOPN filters](https://playfairdata.com/how-to-use-index-for-easier-top-n-tableau-filters/).

---

### **3.3 Putting Data Together**

Data often needs to combined. In this exercise you will do two of the most common transformations supported by Tableau (i.e. union and relationship). Please note that Tableau also supports [joins](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/joining_tables.htm) and [blending](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/multiple_connections.htm), but we will not cover them during these class. 

1. Check the [AdventureWorks dataset](https://github.com/jmperafan/analyzing-data/tree/master/datasets/Adventure%20Works). 

2. Download the following files into your computer:
- AdventureWorks_Sales_2015.csv
- AdventureWorks_Sales_2016.csv
- AdventureWorks_Sales_2017.csv
- AdventureWorks_Customers.csv
- AdventureWorks_Products.csv

3. Open any of them in Tableau. Note how there is an option to your left with all of the files in this folder. 

4. Add a [wildcard union](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/union.htm). Use `AdventureWorks_Sales__*` as the wild card. This will grab all of the sales files in the folder and ignore the other ones. You can make your wild cards more or less strict. It is a matter of judgement if `*Sales*` is good enough. Or if you need something more strict like `AdventureWorks_Sales__20*`.

5. Create a [relationship](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/relate_tables.htm) between the big table containing all of the sales the other tables. Namely, Products and Customers. Tableau will find the linking fields automatically for you, but it is not a bad idea to check if it is correct.