# Lecture 4

### **4.0 Finding Value in Data**
Spend 10 minutes trying to find any type of `valuable insight` in the Superstore dataset (comes standard in every Tableau installation). 

1. What type of insights did you find?
2. What was your strategy?

---

### **4.1 Exploring a dataset**
When you check a dataset for the first time, here are some questions that can serve as the first step of your analysis. In practice, this process can be done in parallel with the identification of potential data quality issues. In other words, exploring data and cleaning data are not always mutually exclusive.

1. *What process or entity is mapped in this table?* Ideally, a table should only contain information of one entity (e.g. client, product) or one process (e.g. sales, returns, hiring). But it is common in practice to find tables containing more than one.

2. *What are the dimensions of my table?* Checking how "big" the data is. This can be done in computational terms (e.g. count of rows, count of columns, bytes) or in human terms (e.g. 2 years of data, 5 regions). 
  
The reason we want to know this upfront is to prevent any performance bottlenecks and find ways to slice the data. Why waiting 10 minutes for a query when you can create a smaller subset of the data?

3. *What does each row represent?* This concept is known as granularity. In the best of cases, each row represents a straight-forward concept like a purchase, an information request, or a customer. 
  
But it is not always obvious. A row can represent multiple concepts at the same time like a product, a shop, and a year. In fact, each row of the `Orders` table in the Superstore dataset is **NOT** a simple order. Can you guess what each row represents?

4. *What is the content of each column?* At this point, you need to check each column, one by one. In the case of the columns containing text, you need to all of the potential values, find out what they mean, and check the frequency in which they appear. 
  
For numeric columns, it is a bit more complex. You need to profile using any or all of the following statistics: `sum`, `average`, `mean`, `mode`, `max`, `min`, `count`, `count distinct`, `standard deviation`, `variance`, `percentiles`. 

5.*How are columns related to each other?* The final step is to find out the relationship between columns. Firstly, check for `hierarchies` (i.e. data linked in a parent-child system). Some examples include category and sub-category or country and city. 

For the nummeric columns, you should check how different sets of columns are related. For example, what is the relationship between columns like `sales` and `profit`? Out of this exercise, you should be able to make statements like 

```
Profit is inversely related to discount rates. 
The more discount we give, the less profit we make.
```
or 
```
Stress has a curvilinear relationship to productivity. Some stress leads to more work produced. 
But we can reach a point when stress becomes a block to productivity.
```
6. *Is this a global phenomenon?* Once you have found interesting relationships in your data, try slicing the data to see if patterns are still present in different groups and moments in time. Some example questions could look like:

```
Is this product rated equally in all regions? 
Do men and women like it equally? 
Has it always been the case over time?
```

Domain expertise really comes handy at this stage. It is only your knowledge of the situation and your business expertise that leads to the best questions. For example, if you are know a lot about finance, you will probably know already some of the most obvious things you will find in data and you will also know what questions are interesting and have potential value to the company.

Pick a dataset (ideally one with multiple columns and, at least, 3k rows) and follow this same process on your own. 